S-Cup: A Security Protocol for Self-reconfiguration
by clustering on Programmable Matter based
Modular Robots
*Note: Sub-titles are not captured in Xplore and should not be used

Youssou Faye
LI3/Department of Computer Sciences
University Assane Seck of Ziguinchor
Ziguinchor, Senegal
yfaye@univ-zig.sn

Abdallah Makhoul
Femto-st/ Department- DISC
University Marie et Louis Pasteur
Montbeliard, France

Mohammed Ouzzif
C3S /ESTC
Hassane II University of Casablanca
Casablanca, Marocco
ouzzif@gmail.com

Cheikhou Oumar Sow
LI3/Department of Computer Science
University Assane Seck of Ziguinchor
Ziguinchor, Senegal
co.s1@zig.univ.sn

abdallah.makhoul@univ-fcomte.fr

Abstract—Programmable matter in the context of
microrobots is like mobile microcomputers with size of a
millimeter, which can move around each other, communicate to
form different shapes. Current challenges are as much
theoretical as technological. The main research challenges in
computer science focus on clustering, synchronization time,
decision-making, analysis of detected data, security and the
autoconfiguration process, which today remains the most
fundamental. When the number of modules is very high, the
self-reconfiguration challenge becomes more crucial for
applications requiring rapid transition between two forms.
Clustering can enable parallel transitions by allowing
geographically close modules to make intra-cluster transitions,
thus reducing reconfiguration complexity, the number of
transitions and the time required. Clustering-based
autoconfiguration solutions are available, but they do not
include the security aspect. In this paper, we propose a security
protocol for clustering-based self-reconfiguration solutions.
This solution relies on resource-efficient cryptographic
mechanisms to implement a robust authentication solution that
underpins a flexible key management mechanism coupled with
a confidential data exchange of the resulting structure
Keywords— Modular Robots, Programmable Matter, selfreconfiguration based on clustering, Lightweight Cryptography

I. INTRODUCTION
Modular robots are designed with modules that connect
together to form autonomous systems with variable
morphology that can perform different functions or tasks. One
of the potential applications of self-reconfigurable modular
robots is programmable matter [1]. Programmable matter
based on modular robots envisages materials built as an
assembly of thousands of micro-scale, millimeter-sized
robotic modules that can move around each other,
communicate to give different shapes [2]. Application areas
are diverse and include space shuttles, medical devices, search
and rescue, etc...... Whereas conventional robots can only be
adapted to a single application or purpose, modular robots can
fulfil a wide range of missions [3]. Current challenges are as

Serigne Mbacke Diene
LI3/Department of Computer Science
University Assane Seck of Ziguinchor
Ziguinchor, Senegal
s.diene20150547@zig.univ.sn

much theoretical as technological, and turn around
modularity, mechanical design, electronic design, control
algorithms, software and communications protocols. The
main research challenges in computer science focus most on
clustering, synchronization time, decision-making, analysis of
detected data, security and, finally, the autoconfiguration
process, which today remains the most fundamental.
[3,4,5,6]. Self-reconfiguration in modular robotics has several
drawbacks: i) the reconfiguration process is very timeconsuming, especially when the number of modules is very
high, which is unsuitable for many programmable matter
applications, especially mission-critical applications requiring
rapid transition between two forms; ii) most work is dedicated
to one type of modular robot and cannot be generalized to
others; iii) the computational complexity in most models is
high and unsuitable for limited resources. Clustering can
enable transition parallelism by allowing geographically close
modules to make intra-cluster transitions, thus reducing
reconfiguration complexity, the number of transitions and the
time required. It was demonstrated in [7] that cluster-based
autoconfiguration can improve the execution time and
communication efficiency. Most of the clustering solutions
proposed for modular robots have limitations for application
in the self-configuration of programmable materials based on
modular robots. Some of them consider the partitioning
problem independently of the task at hand, which is selfconfiguration. [8, 9, 10], others focus on the configuration of
small sets of modules [11, 12] or ignore the size constraint,
which is crucial for transforming groups of the initial shape
into specific parts of the target shape requiring a fixed number
of modules [13, 14]. Recently, highly advanced clustering
solutions for programmable materials based on modular
robots have been proposed to overcome these shortcomings
by adapting to the scaling, cluster size constraints and
distributed environment [5,8,15 ]. However, they do not take
security into account. To our knowledge, only one work
exists, and it focuses more on the current hardware and
software configuration of the amoebot model [16] to propose
a multi-stage authentication service, without taking into

account possible evolutions relating to the material as such,
which, through its physical configuration, underpins the
exchange and autoconfiguration protocols [17].
. In this paper, we propose S-Cup, a security protocol for
clustering-based autoconfiguration solutions by using
lightweight
cryptographic
to
implement
mutual
authentication, flexible key management and confidential data
exchange for the formed structure. The key management
protocol adapts to the autoconfiguration process according to
the pattern of structure skeleton formation and/or cluster
formation, the degree of connectivity and the sharing of
common keys in the same neighborhood.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We set the
context in section 2 and the studied background in section 3.
Section 4 sets out the assumptions and presents the operating
architecture of the modular robot system. The safety
challenges are presented in Section 5 and the proposed
solution in Section 6, followed by an analysis in Section 7 and
a conclusion and outlook in Section 8.
II. CONTEXT
The classification of modular robotic systems is quite a
difficult task, due to the number of existing projects and the
diversity of their task, form, size or control system. Some
modules are controlled by external computers. Others are
directed by a control module or are completely autonomous.
Nevertheless, all modules are equipped in the same way, both
physically and logically. A security solution is highly
dependent on system architecture and configuration when
deployed on the lower layers. A security solution for
programmable material must be contextualized according to
its framework and application domain, which is strongly
correlated to its architecture. This application framework
depends on the physical nature of the programmable material.
We can distinguish between programmable matter based on
modular robots such as ATRON and Sambot, and
programmable matter based on tiny module such as 3D
Catoms (milimetric scale). Each material is characterized by a
number of properties.
•

its mobility: is ensured by an actuating mechanism;
BlinkyBlock is static, while 2D Catoms and 3D
Catoms are mobile.

•

its degree of freedom of movement: 2D Catoms move
by rolling over their fixed neighbors, while 3D
Catoms move around their neighbors.

•

its number of neighbors: BlinkyBlock can have up to
4 neighbors, 2D Catoms up to 6, 3D Catoms up to 12.

•

its field of application: the BlinkyBlock is used to
create interactive works of art, education and
research.

In the first case, where self-reconfiguring modular robots
can modify their general form to adapt to the environment or
to a task or scenario, depending on the data detected and
analyzed from the real environment in which they evolve. In
the second case, this set of tiny modules where each module
has communication and computing capacity. This is known as
modular robot-based programmable matter. In the following,
we focus on programmable matter based on modular robots..

III. BACKGROUND
A. Programmable matter vs WSN and IoT
Modular robots have similarities with Wireless Sensor
Networks (WSN) and the Internet of Things (IoT), but also
differences that have a major impact on security. Lightweight
security schemes have been proposed for IoT, WSN and RFID
[18, 19,20 ] are not adequate because modular robot systems
present environments and structuring that make it difficult to
execute certain algorithms. Furthermore, security algorithms
proposed for WSN and IoT would not be suitable for sensors
on modular robots [21, 22, 23, 24]. These differences with
WSNs and the IoT include: i) a very large number of modules
or particles or cells; ii) particles are anonymous and do not
have a unique identifier like sensors; iii) a highly dynamic
topology during autoconfiguration; iv) neighbor-to-neighbor
communication (no routing); v) modules are not connected to
the Internet. In addition to these specific features, there are
other challenges linked to the type of communication
(neighbor-to-neighbor by contact, wireless), the selforganization process (started by one module or parallel by
several modules) and the system architecture (computercontrolled, controlled by a leader module, autonomous).
B. Security analysis in programmable matter
Security in modular robot-based programmable matter is a
real challenge. Due to their characteristics, security protocols
in WSN, IoT and RFID are inadequate. Security issues are not
well addressed. To the best of our knowledge, only the
Protocol of Lightweight Security Embedded in an
Architecture of Nanobots (PROLISAN) has been proposed
[7], and its scope of application is limited to a category of
modules. PROLISAN uses lightweight cryptographic
mechanisms based on hash functions and symmetrical block
ciphers to reduce memory storage and computation time. It
provides two security services: authentication of modules
when they connect to the system, and confidentiality of
communications between modules to prevent unauthorized
third parties from learning about system behavior and
decision-making. Four versions are available, with different
levels of security and authentication.
The first version provides a weak authentication service
based on the fingerprint from the hash of the source code. It
does not guarantee membership in the structure, replay old
messages is possible because the same fingerprint will be used
by all modules. Only the source code is needed to create an
authentication message.
The second version provides an authentication and
confidentiality based on hashing the code into two
fingerprints: one is used for authentication and the other as a
data encryption key for confidentiality. Just like the first
version, it does not guarantee membership in the structure,
replay old messages is always possible because the same
fingerprint will be used by all modules. In addition, it requires
more resources with two fingerprints. Unlike the first, its
security is designed based on the hash of the first n lines for
authentication and the last m (n ≠m) lines for key. This does
not solve the problem highlighted in the first version since the
hash function used will always produce the same size of
fingerprints and the same code will always produce the same
fingerprint. If the channel is not physically secure, it is
possible to capture a fingerprint to authenticate or decrypt the
messages. So it can work with communication by contact, the
signal must not be accessible to neighbors, and the code must
not be known to the general public. The third version redefines

authentication. For both authentication and confidentiality, it
uses the hash of a line instead of a part of the source code as
in version 2. Its security depends on the line generation
mechanism based on the authentication number and a chaotic
function to determine the lines to be hashed. However, even if
the character of determining the line to be hashed is more or
less random, the hash of the line is sent for authentication, so
replay attack is always possible. If the chaotic function is
known, it is necessary to have the source code to create an
authentication message. In version 2, the same key was used
by neighbors, while here we have a key for each pair of
modules. This version is based on the fact that malicious nodes
do not know the protocol, which is a limitation for public use.
Furthermore, the authentication mechanism stipulates that the
moving module authenticates itself to the fixed module, there
is a problem when two modules are moving, each module can
remain waiting (infinite idle listening).
The fourth version, an improvement on the third, solves
the problem of module mobility by using module identities
distributed by a leader. Thus, modules authenticate
themselves through their ID, their Clock, which determines
the part to be hashed. Module A authenticates B through
ID_B, the hash of part of B's code H(CodeB), and the Clock_B
that B sent to it. And through B's clock, A identifies the
corresponding part of its code, which it hashes and verifies
with the code received from B. This version uses the same
encryption method as version 3. Although it regulates module
movement, this version runs in a more restrictive environment
since a leader and IDs are required, distributed a priori. This
raises the question of contact-based communication for
moving modules. If the clocks were synchronized, there
would be no need to send them; sending a clock simply reveals
the part of the code to be used for authentication.
IV. ASSUMPTIONS AND SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
A. System assumptions
Here, we plan to study the security of clustering-based
autoconfiguration of a programmable matter system based on
modular robots that is very similar to 3D Catoms in that it will
have the following properties:
• The system is distributed, and controlled by a
computer or a leader module that can just play the role
of giving the signal and shape to start the
autoconfiguration process.
•

In the initial form, the modules are divided into
groups that will later form the goal form clusters.

•

During the formation of goal-form, we distinguish
three types of communication:

-

Phase 1: communication between CHs or interClusters to form the skeleton of the structure

-

Phase 2: Communication between members of the
same cluster or intra-cluster communication to shape
the cluster which is part of the goal form.

-

Phase 3: Communication between any two
neighboring modules in the structure to connect two
clusters if necessary, or during structure operation.

•

When the structure is formed, a module only
communicates with its neighbors via one of its
connectors or a wireless signal.

•

A module can have as many neighbors as required.

•

All modules are identical and execute the same
source code.

•

Once clusters have been formed, a module can
communicate with a neighbor in a different cluster.

•

Clocks are reset at the same time and each time
modules receive the signal to start the
autoconfiguration process.

•

Modules have no identifier

•

The structure will be formed from the cluster leaders,
initially giving the skeleton.

•

No secrets are shared a priori; everything will be built
from 0.

B. System architecture
Modular robot-based systems are limited in terms of basic
architecture, motion and communication. Current hardware
and software technologies work on the basis of chain, lattice
or hybrid architectures, sometimes supported by a sandbox
with modules that rotate around their pivot neighbors or slide
on the lattice, and that can communicate by contact. Here, we
study the autoconfiguration process on more advanced
architectures with greater freedom of movement and
communication between modules. For a scalable safety
protocol that will take into account future technological and
software mutations in modular robot systems, we put
ourselves in a context that takes into account the following
assumptions:
• Modules that can communicate by contact and wirelessly
• Modules that can move on a trellis or on their neighbors,
on a support on which they are placed or in the
environment in which they evolve.
• Modules that can move in any direction with a total degree
of freedom.
• Modules communicate only with their direct (one-hop)
neighbors, which are limited in number.
Based on these assumptions, we consider an architecture
where modules operate as a distributed system during selfreconfiguration. The system is formed in clusters, with a
cluster leader (CH) in each cluster. Modules can communicate
by contact or wirelessly. Clusters are made up of
geographically close modules the figure “Fig.1”. shows an
architecture with wireless communication between CHs and
contact communication between CHs and MCs (cluster
members). We won't go into the process of electing cluster
leaders, which can be based on criteria such as residual
energy, geographical position, etc....

Fig. 1. Clustering System Architecture

The modules of the initial structure are divided into groups
based on the goal form from. The security process begins
really when the goal form clusters start. From the architecture
shown in Fig.2, we move from an initial set of modules

arranged in grid form to a set of modules divided into groups
of modules to form the goal form clusters. Each color
represents a cluster, the three clusters each have three modules
and the fourth has 6 modules. The diagram in Fig.3. shows us
the transition from this set of modules divided into groups on
a grid (the initial form) to the final or goal form (Cup)
according to the following steps:
1) Skeleton-forming
phase
or
inter-cluster
communication phase: CHs position themselves in strategic
locations that generate less movement to form the skeleton of
the structure as shown in Fig.3.-(a), only CHs communicate
with each other by contact or wirelessly. In our case, cluster
4 is automatically formed.
2) Cluster
formation
phase
or
intra-cluster
communication phase: each cluster is formed by the
transitions of CMs to give part of the goal shape as shown in
Fig.3.-(b) and Fig.3.-(c).
3) The operation phase: once the structure has been
formed, it becomes operational and modules need to
communicate with their neighbors, whether or not they belong
to the same cluster (Fig.3.-(c)).

Fig. 2. Preliminary groups segmentation

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 3. Progressive self-reconfiguration

V. SECURITY CHALLENGES
The environnement of programmable matter based on
modular robots is very restrictive in terms of security.
•

The main challenge lies in the limited resources of
modules that are unsuitable for resource-intensive
security mechanisms.

•

The lack of identifiers, which complicates
identification and authentication mechanisms.

•

For public use, security solutions need a priori
information sharing for a security pre-configuration
phase, as in the case of access points, or some IoT
networks, etc. For private use, this a priori security
configuration can meet the user's needs. However, for
public use of modular robots, it is virtually impossible
to configure hundreds of thousands of modules.

•

The use of contact communication would be more
secure in the face of some attacks on the channel, but

we advocate more scalable modules that are
sufficiently autonomous to be able to communicate by
contact and via a wireless channel.
•

Authentication is the major challenge as there is no
central entity in the strict sense of the term to manage
authentication. Modules have no identifiers. Hence, it
is difficult to produce authentication through a peerto-peer relationship.

•

Confidentiality is ensured by encryption, which
requires key management. The absence of a trusted
third party makes it difficult to use asymmetric
cryptography. And in the absence of a module
identifier, sharing symmetrical keys without a third
party poses more challenges in a fully distributed
environment.

•

Key management is a real challenge, in that it must be
economical in terms of memory, computation and
energy, to meet the very limited resources of the
modules. As far as possible, key storage must be
avoided, and communication to establish keys
minimized. In addition, it must take place in a
distributed environment, with no a priori secret
sharing and no central entity.

VI. SECURE-CUP
We propose the Secure-Cup (S-Cup) a Security Protocol
for Self-reconfiguration by clustering on Programmable
Matter based Modular Robots to secure the clustering-based
autoconfiguration process. S-Cup provides authentication,
key management and confidentiality services during skeletonformation phase, clusters formation phase and the operational
phase. It is based on an authentication mechanism at the end
of which, a peer key is established between two CHs during
the first phase, a group key for each cluster during the second
phase, and a global key for the whole structure during the
operational phase. To reduce autoconfiguration time, we
consider that the structure will be formed in parallel from the
CHs, which will first perform a pairwise mutual
authentication to build a skeleton of the connected structure.
Authentication involves a CH proving that it belongs to the
structure by proving that it executes the same code as those in
the structure. Since all modules execute the same code, and
there is no trusted third party at the outset, it is difficult for two
modules to authenticate in a peer-to-peer relationship. We
distinguish between three types of authentications:
•

Authentication between CHs, which is mutual
between CHs to be connected during skeleton
formation (Fig. 3-(a)).

•

Mutual authentication between CHs and CMs in the
same cluster during cluster formation (Fig. 3-(b)).

•

Authentication between CH and CM, or CM and CM
from different clusters, for inter-cluster connection.
The notations in TABLE I will be used in the
following.

A. Security of skeleton formation
During this phase, the CHs must mutually authenticate and
establish either a pairwise key between neighboring CHs,
or a single key shared by all CHs, depending on the
skeleton

TABLE I.

Symboles
CH
iCH
CHn
ni
Ts
Tr
Li
Nb
H()
Å
||
®
Dt
»

NOTATION

Description
One Cluster Head of the structure
Initial Cluster Head
The Cluster Head n, n is an integer
Number once, i is an integer

CHn calculates n2=x1Ån0, and in turn generates the
key K1= H(L(n2 modulo Nb)). So iCH and CHn have
authenticated each other and share the key K1, as
shown in Algorithm 1. In this case may be CH4 first,
as it is closer to CH3.

•

In the same way, the protocol takes place between
CH1 and iCH, between CH2 and iCH except that at
phase SF-1, the nonces n0 and n1 chosen by each CHn
will be different. However, CHi always keeps its
nonce n2 at phase SF-4, so that it can generate the
same key K1 for everyone. This results in the key
scheme shown in Fig.4-(a).

Current reception time

Line i in the code
Number of lines code
One-way hash function
Exclusive-or (XOR) operation
Concatenation
Transmission
Transmission delay
Approximate value to nearest integer

1)
Serial skeleton formation model
The skeleton begins to form from an initial CH or iCH,
which can be designated by election, by a computer or by a
leader module according to criteria such as geographical
position, for example. The skeleton starts with the iCH
module, which will connect the first module by mutually
authenticating. All clocks are synchronized at the start of the
experiment, so that the same timer T is used.
A CH that initiates a connection specifies in the request
the period Ts for sending the request, a nonce ni that both
identifies the request and is used to calculate the line to be
hashed. The period Ts is the nearest integer value of the
sending time noted ts at clock level, divided by ten: Ts ≈
(ts/10). This makes it possible to correct small clock
desynchronization offsets.
When the experiment is started and the initial CH iCH in
place. The iCH is the CH3 for our skeleton in Fig.3.-(a) due to
its centric position.

•

•

Current sending time

formation model. We distinguish between the serial skeleton
formation model (i.e., starting from a single CH) and the
parallel formation model (i.e., starting from multiple CHs
simultaneously). The serial model allows for the generation of
a single key for the entire skeleton, or even the whole
structure, but with a longer transition time. In contrast, the
parallel model results in a shorter formation time, with one key
per pair of CHs

•

whether K0=H(L(n0' modulo Nb)). If so, iCH
launches the key generation challenge by generating
a nonce n2, calculates x1=n2Ån0, generates the key
K1= HL(n2 modulo Nb)) and sends x1 to CHn.

A CHn ( CH4 for example), sends an authentication
request to the iCH to prove that it belongs to the
skeleton. It generates a nonce n0. An authentication
request is identified by its composition; no need to tell
the iCH that it's a first request for skeleton formation,
as it knows it's the initial iCH and is not linked to any
module. CHn calculates: n1 = H(n0); the
authentication fingerprint K0 by applying the hash
function H() on the line L(n0 modulo Nb) of the
source code, i.e. K0=H(L(n0 modulo Nb)); x=TsÅn0
to protect nonce n0 then sends n1 and (x||K0) to the
iCH. The fingerprint n1 in the request enables the iCH
to check that the clocks are synchronized.
After receiving the message, iCH examines the
message reception time Ts at clock level, calculates
Ts » ((Tr-∆t)/10), then calculates n0'=x ÅTs, and
checks whether n1= H(n0'). If so, synchronization is
good. iCH must now authenticate CHn by checking

Algorithm 1: Authentication for skeleton formation
SF-1 : CHn
Chooses n0,
,: CHn
Computes n1 = H(n0)
: CHn
Computes K0=H(L(n0 modulo Nb))
: CHn
Computes x=TsÅn0
SF-2 : CHn ® iCH
n1, (x ||K0)
SF-3 : iCH
Computes Ts» ((Tr-∆t)/10)
: iCH
Drift n0’= x ÅTs
: iCH
Verify if n1= H(n0’)
: iCH
Verify if K0=H(L(n0 modulo Nb))
SF-4 : iCH
Chooses n2
: iCH
Computes x1=n2Ån0
: iCH
Computes K1= HL(n2 modulo Nb))
x1
: iCH ® CH4
SF-5 : CHn
Computes n2=x1Ån0
: CHn
Computes K1=H(L(n2 modulo Nb))

For one unique key in the skeleton, the CHn already linked
CH1, CH2 and CH4 will play the same role as the initial CH
(CH3) with the other CHs not yet linked, as would be the case
with a possible CH5 belonging to the skeleton. For a link
between CH1 and CH2, the first to receive the request will
play the role of iCH, which will always lead to a one-key
scheme, as shown in figure 4.-(b).

(a)

(b)

Fig. 4. Single Key model

2)
Parallel Skeleton Formation
Parallel training has the advantage of reducing skeleton
formation time, especially when the number of CHs is high.
From Algorithm 1, we can move towards a scheme where
each pair of CHs shares a common key. Thus, CHs establish
keys in pairs using Algorithm 1, the connection initiator first
authenticates as CHn in phase SF-2, and the connection
recipient authenticates by issuing a challenge, as iCH does in
phase SF-4.. In our example, Algorithm 1 can be run in

parallel between CH3 and CH4 at the same time as between
CH1 and CH2 to create keys K1 and K2 respectively, then
between CH3 and CH1 and then between CH3 and CH4 to
create keys K3 and K4 as it shown in Fig. 5. Key diversity
comes from the fact that a CH chooses new nonces each time
Algorithm 1 is run.

Fig. 5. Parallele pairwise key establishment within the skeleton

3)
Clustering Phase
After the skeleton formation phase, comes the cluster
formation phase, which proceeds identically regardless of
whether the skeleton was formed serially or in parallel. Each
CH will create a unique key for its entire cluster, still based on
Algorithm 1, where it plays the same role as the iCH for the
MCs directly connected to it.
Depending on the nonce that the CH either reuses or
generates during phase SF-4, we identify three possible
scenarios:
•

Case 1: The CH reuses, in phase SF-4, the same nonce
n2 that was used during serial skeleton formation.

•

Case 2: The CH uses a different nonce n2′ in phase
SF-4, distinct from the n2 used during serial skeleton
formation.

•

Case 3: The CH reuses, in phase SF-4, one of the
nonces used with its neighboring CHs or generates a
new nonce instead of n2 during parallel skeleton
formation.

The MCs directly connected to the CH will then, in turn, act
as iCHs in Algorithm 1 toward the MCs that are not directly
connected to the CH, which they must connect using the same
nonce n2 received from the CH during phase SF-4. Figure 6
illustrates the security protocol between a CH directly
connecting to MC1, which in turn directly connects to MC2,
corresponding to Case 3.

Fig. 6. Security Protocol between CH-MC1-MC2

VII. SECURITY ANALYSIS
A. Security
In this section, we provide an analysis of the security
services provided and a theoretical evaluation of performance
and robustness against attacks. The most difficult thing in this
environment, with no security channel or trusted third party,
is to share a key without any a priori shared information. Here,
we first use clock synchronization at the start of each phase.
We use an approximation to eliminate any offset with a certain
degree of uncertainty. Calculating the transmission clock
divided by 10 and rounded off to the nearest integer allows us
to correct for uncertainties of -5 to +5 of the normal value. For
example, for an offset of 8 units between the receiver and
transmitter clocks (i.e. 96 for the receiver and 104 for the
transmitter), the receiver finds Ts=96/10=9.6 or 10, which is
also equivalent to the approximate value of the transmitter
!"#
clock, Ts = !" = 10,4 𝑜𝑟 10.
In Algorithm 1, the nonce n0 used is never disclosed and
enables a new module to authenticate itself and generate the
key that will be shared between iCH and CHn, while the
fingerprint n1 derived from n0 will be used to verify
synchronization and identify the request. If phase SF3 of
Algorithm 1 is successfully completed, iCH will have
authenticated CHn by proving that it has the same code. In
phase SF-5, iCH challenges CHn through a request during
which CHn is asked to prove by another line that it has the
same code as iCH, otherwise it will not be able to share a
common key with iCH. If CHn succeeds in generating the
expected key, it will also have mutually authenticated iCH.
The replay attack, which is the most critical, is impossible
for several reasons. A repeated message will never be
synchronized, as it will be delayed and the Ts calculation will
fail. Without n0, the message sent in phase SF-2 of Algorithm
1 cannot be generated
Furthermore, the protocol offers a wide range of key
generation methods, from one key shared by the entire
network to one key per module pair. Noted that, for a unique
key, the number of hash operations required to generate the
key will be greater, and the skeleton formation phase will take
longer.
However, the network shares a global key, which means
that all the structure's communications can be protected
without any additional mechanism during the operational
phase. On the other hand, for a key per pair of CHs, the
number of hash operations required to generate the keys is
reduced, and the skeleton formation time is also reduced,
especially when the number of CHs is high. However, the
probability of two modules close to the structure sharing a key
becomes low, and for a connection between two clusters after
their formation, the modules involved still have to authenticate
each other, which requires an additional mechanism. After the
authentication and key generation phase, two neighbors share
at least one key and will be able to encrypt data in the
operational phase. It is important to note that keys do not have
to be stored, but rather generated. A module just needs to store
the nonce n0, from which it can generate keys and possibly
other nonces.
B. Overhead Cost Comparisons
We analyze and compare our proposed solution to show
its complexity (computation, time, communication, storage)
and its resistance to forgery and repetition attacks.
Complexity is assessed for the formation of a secure link
between two modules. Table II shows that S-cup offers better

safety than all 4 PROLISEAN versions, but consumes slightly
more energy than versions 1 and 2. If we quantify the time
taken for each hash, encryption or transmission operation,
we'll be able to determine how long the autoconfiguration
process will take. This will depend on the total number of links
in the structure, as Algorithm 1 is executed on each link. We
can model this system with graphs, where the nodes are the
modules, the degree the neighbors. We can then calculate the
number of links to know how many times Algorithm 1 will be
executed. If v is the number of neighbors for each module and
m the total number of modules, then the number of links is:
!.#
w = . The cost c is given by (1).
$

c=

𝑣. 𝑚
(6TH + 2Tx + 4XOR)
2

(1)

So, for a structure to be formed, the overall time complexity
will be linear with the number of links and will be O(w).
TABLE II.
Solutions »›

OVERHEAD COMPARISONS

S-Cup

PROLISEAN

Parameters

»›

V1

V2

V3

V4

Space Complexity

O(1)

O(1)

O(1)

O(1)

O(1)

Time Complexity

O(1)

O(1)

O(1)

O(n)

O(n)

Storage Complexity

O(1)

O(1)

O(1)

O(1)

O(1)

Transmission
Complexity
Number of keys
used
Authentication

O(1)

O(1)

O(1)

O(1)

O(1)

Pairwise

No

Hight

Medium

Confidentiality

Hight

Replay again replay
Attacks
Protection
again
Forgery Attacks
Overhead Cost

1

Pairwise

Pairwise

Medium

Hight

No

Medium
m
Low

Low

Hight

Hight

No

No

Low

Medium

Hight

No

No

Low

Medium

6H+2x+
4XOR

2H+2Tx

4H+2Tx

4H+4Tx

4H+4Tx

TH : the time for performing a one-way hash function h().
TXOR : the time for performing an XOR operation.
Tx: the delay time for the communication taken place in one-hops.

VIII. CONCLUSION
In this article, we proposed S-Cup, a Secure-Cup, a new
protocol to secure the self-configuration process based on
clustering, and at the same time the structure thus formed
during its operational phase.
The proposed protocol
implements a robust mutual authentication mechanism, after
which a key is generated to ensure the confidentiality of the
messages exchanged. The protocol uses lightweight
cryptographic mechanisms to implement adaptive key
generation models in a highly constrained modular robot
system environment. Security analysis shows that the protocol
handles many types of attack, notably replay and fabrication
attacks, which are the most frequent and difficult to counter in
these environments. As a follow-up to this work, we will
implement this protocol with different key usage models in
VisibleSim to measure their efficiency in terms of energy
consumption, memory and computation of cryptographic
operations. We will also implement the Avispa simulator to
confirm the verification of security properties.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

J. Bourgeois,, et al.: Programmable matter as a cyber-physical
conjugation. In: 2016 IEEE International Conference on Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics (SMC), pp. 002942–002947. IEEE (2016)
P., Thalamy, B. Piranda, & J. Bourgeois, (2019). A survey of
autonomous
self-reconfiguration
methods
for
robot-based

programmable matter. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 2019, vol.
120, p. 103242.
[3] Ahmadzadeh and E. Masehian, “Modular robotic systems: Methods
and algorithms for abstraction, planning, control, and synchronization,”
Artificial Intelligence, vol. 223, pp. 27–64, 2015.
[4] L. Mihaylova, T. Lefebvre, H.Bruyninckx, K. Gadeyne, and J.D.
Schutter, “Acomparison of decision making criteria and optimization
methods for active robotic sensing,” in International Conference on
Numerical Methods and Applications. Springer, 2002, pp. 316–324
[5] J. Bassil, A. Makhoul, B. Piranda, J. Bourgeois: Distributed sizeconstrained clustering algorithm for modular robot-based
programmable matter. ACM Trans. Auton. Adapt. Syst. 18(1), 1:1–
1:21 (2023)
[6] J. Bassil, B. Piranda, A. Makhoul, & J. Bourgeois, Distributed
Configuration Recognition for 2D Lattice-Based Modular Robots. In
:International Conference on Advanced Information Networking and
Applications: Springer Nature Switzerland, 2025, April, p. 140-151..
[7] Moussa, M., Piranda, B., Makhoul, A., & Bourgeois, J. (2021, April).
Cluster-based distributed self-reconfiguration algorithm for modular
robots. In International Conference on Advanced Information
Networking and Applications (pp. 332-344). Cham: Springer
International Publishing.
[8] Mazdin, P., & Rinner, B. (2021). Distributed and communicationaware coalition formation and task assignment in multi-robot
systems. IEEE Access, 2021, vol. 9, p. 35088-35100.
[9] Dutta, A., Ufimtsev, V., Asaithambi, A., & Czarnecki, E. (2019).
Coalition formation for multi-robot task allocation via correlation
clustering. Cybernetics and Systems, 2019, vol. 50, no 8, p. 711-728.
[10] Dutta, A., Dasgupta, R., Baca, J., & Nelson, C. A. (2015, January).
Spanning Tree Partitioning Approach for Configuration Generation in
Modular Robots. In FLAIRS (pp. 360-365).
[11] Dutta, A., Ufimtsev, V., Asaithambi, A., & Czarnecki, E. (2019).
Coalition formation for multi-robot task allocation via correlation
clustering, Cybernetics and Systems, 2019, vol. 50, no 8, p. 711-728.
[12] Cruz, N. B., Nedjah, N., & de Macedo Mourelle, L. (2017). Robust
distributed spatial clustering for swarm robotic based systems. Applied
Soft Computing, 2017, vol. 57, p. 727-737.
[13] Bassil, J., Moussa, M., Makhoul, A., Piranda, B., & Bourgeois, J.
(2020, October). Linear distributed clustering algorithm for modular
robots based programmable matter. In 2020 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) (pp. 33203325).
[14] Shao, J., Yang, Q., Zhang, Z., Liu, J., & Kramer, S. (2018). Graph
clustering with local density-cut. In Database Systems for Advanced
Applications: 23rd International Conference, DASFAA 2018, Gold
Coast, QLD, Australia, May 21-24, 2018, Proceedings, Part I 23 (pp.
187-202). Springer International Publishing.
[15] A. Majed, H. Harb, A. Nasser, et B. Clement, « RUN: a robust clusterbased planning for fast self-reconfigurable modular robotic systems »,
Intell. Serv. Robot., vol. 16, no 1, p. 75‑85, mars 2023, doi:
10.1007/s11370-023-00454-w.
[16] Z. Derakhshandeh. 2017. Algorithmic Foundations of Self-Organizing
Programmable Matter. Ph.D. Dissertation. Arizona State University
[17] Z. Derakhshandeh. 2017. Algorithmic Foundations of Self-Organizing
Programmable Matter. Ph.D. Dissertation. Arizona State University
[18] [17] Hourany, E., Habib, B., Fountaine, C., Makhoul, A., Piranda, B.,
& Bourgeois, J. (2021). Prolisean: A new security protocol for
programmable matter. ACM Transactions on Internet Technology
(TOIT), 2021, vol. 21, no 1, p. 1-29.
[19] [18] Victor Kathan Sarker, Tuan Nguyen Gia, Hannu Tenhunen, and
Tomi Westerlund. 2020. Lightweight Security Algorithms for
Resource-constrained IoT-based Sensor Nodes. In ICC 2020-2020
IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC). IEEE, 1–7.
[20] [19] Mohammad Wazid, Ashok Kumar Das, Vivekananda Bhat, and
Athanasios V Vasilakos. 2020. LAM-CIoT: Lightweight
authentication mechanism in cloud-based IoT environment. Journal
of Network and Computer Applications 150 (2020), 102496.
[21] [20] Zhang, Y., Parker, L. E., & Kambhampati, S. (2014, May).
Coalition coordination for tightly coupled multirobot tasks with sensor
constraints. In 2014 IEEE international conference on robotics and
automation (ICRA) (pp. 1090-1097). IEEE.
[22] Faye, Y., Guyennet, H., Niang, I., & Shou, Y. . Fast scalar
multiplication on elliptic curve cryptography in selected intervals

suitable for wireless sensor networks. In : Cyberspace Safety and
Security: 5th International Symposium, CSS 2013, Zhangjiajie, China,
November 13-15, 2013, Proceedings 5. Springer International
Publishing, 2013. p. 171-182.
[23] [22] Faye, Y., Niang, I., & Guyennet, H. (2019, March). New Node
Distributed Access Control Scheme for Wireless Sensor Network. In
: Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Information
Systems and Technologies. 2019. p. 1-4.
[24] [23 Soni, S., & Hussain, M. (2025). Light Weight Authentication of
Devices in Wireless Sensor Network. Procedia Computer Science,
2025, vol. 252, p. 1005-1013.

[25] Saha, D. (2024). Improving IoT Security in Wireless Sensor
Networks. Smart Internet of Things, Smart Internet of Things, 2024,
vol. 1, no 4, p. 289-297.J. Clerk Maxwell, A Treatise on Electricity and
Magnetism, 3rd ed., vol. 2. Oxford: Clarendon, 1892, pp.68–73.

